## A valediction for validation?

In 2018, Paul Wheatley wrote ["A valediction for validation?"](https://www.dpconline.org/blog/a-valediction-for-validation), which reflects on file format validation, with a focus on PDF. He observes that "there is a significant disconnect between validation and the digital preservation answers we need". He mentions several factors that are contributing to this, including:

- Flaws of the validation tools themselves.
- Tool reports with microscopic level minutiae that are often difficult to interpret.
- The fact that even if the format validation is complete and thorough, other issues that are important from a digital preservation point of view may go unnoticed.

Some good examples of the last point are the presence of encrypted content or external dependencies. Even though both may be allowed by the format specification, these features are nevertheless obstacles against successful rendering.

## Preservation risk assessment

He also argues that validation is often treated as an end in itself, without much consideration for the purpose it is supposed to fulfil. As a way out of this situation, he first stresses the importance of clearly stating the purpose. In Paul's view, validation is part of a broader risk assessment of digital content[^9]. The overall goal of this risk assessment is to answer the following questions: 

> Does this digital object render without error, accurately and usefully for the user, and is it likely to render in the future? If not, should we do something about that?

The risk assessment should then ensure that a file is not encrypted, doesn't have any external dependencies, isn't badly broken, and has the expected file format[^8]. Even though this won't 100% guarantee that a file will render, at least it covers the most likely obstacles against a file successfully rendering.

## Format validation vs rendering tools

Within this risk assessment, "format validation" largely serves as an automated proxy for rendering a file in a viewer (which would be too laborious to do manually). The main purpose of the validation tool here is to "highlight the (hopefully) small number of our files that warrant further investigation via manual assessment". Ultimately, Paul suggests that this particular task could be done even better by dropping validation tools altogether, and that it might be more worthwhile to invest in adapting rendering tools to do this job instead.

## Links

- [A valediction for validation?](https://www.dpconline.org/blog/a-valediction-for-validation) - blog post by Paul Wheatley


[^8]: As per the result of the file format identification tool that was used.

[^9]: What makes things slightly confusing is that throughout his post, Paul appears to use the word "validation" to indicate two different things: first, as a process that evaluates a file against a format specification (narrow definition), and second as a process that includes the full risk assessment, including checking for encryption and external dependencies (broad definition). In my post I'm sticking to the narrow definition, but in doing so I had to re-state my summary of Paul's suggestions in those terms.